Kick off with a few, few comments,
and then we'll love to, uh, ask you lots of
Questions. Great. Well, that's really good.
'cause normally
one gets 10 minutes.
Mm-hmm. And, and you get two
or three questions if you are, if you're lucky.
So it's good quality time,
Duration until about, uh, five to Oh,
No, that's really wonderful.
So, um, I guess the first point, so I'm,
I'm speaking on Charles Ney, um, independent chair of the,
uh, New Zealand Pork Company, CEO group.
Um, and, um, first point to make is, uh,
to say thank you for doing this inquiry,
because anything that, um, puts the spotlight on
the supply chain, in particular, the port sector,
um, is, is very welcome.
'cause often we are, forget, forgotten.
Often we are seen as sort of a poor cousin to aviation and,
and, and other parts of the sector.
But as you all know,
'cause I know you are really working hard
and you're visiting lots of ports, um, uh, this is a sector
that, that is critically important to the economy.
Um, we, we can't survive without exporting.
Uh, and 99% of our exports by volume are going
through the seaports.
And we can't survive, as we found out
during COVID without quite a lot of importing as well.
And, and, uh, most of that product comes
through the seaports as well.
So we want to have them operating as, um,
efficiently as possible.
Uh, and, um, uh, government, um,
can play a very important role, uh, in terms
of us getting there.
Most, um, most significant
significantly from our perspective.
Um, uh, government can help with planning, uh,
processes and laws.
Um, and we have been, uh, supportive of the reforms
to the RMA that, um, uh,
both the labor led government and,
and this government, um, have been progressing
and we're grateful, uh, for the wide support in Parliament.
Um, for, for the, to be reformed, the most obvious problem,
and I'm sure you visited the port of Toran
or you're going to, but,
but, uh, the most obvious problem is, is, is that consent,
which has been going on for seven years
or so, costing, uh, tens of millions of dollars.
And, uh, um, um, basically stopping the expansion
of our, our major export port.
And, uh, we're in the situation right now
where our major export port is having to turn business away
because it's at, at, um, at capacity.
Um, uh,
but we have a number of other ports that that, that, um,
have projects, uh, pending, uh, thanks
to the fast track process.
Port of Auckland has got their, their major project through,
um, we've got, uh, Northport wanting to expand,
um, and hasn't been able to get its consent finalized.
Uh, we've got, um, thanks to earthquakes, no,
no consenting issue for, for, for the, uh,
Littleton Port Company,
but they've got a, they need money to, um,
for an expansion there, they're ready to go.
Uh, and there's a major, um, inland port project that, uh,
port Otago is working on,
and pretty much every port has got, um, a project there.
Uh, and we need to have, uh, uh, uh, an efficient
and quick way to get the consents.
Um, we, um, uh, have, um,
highlighted in our submission, um, uh, the, um,
uh, issues around, um,
uh, the, uh, ownership reports.
Um, and we were pleased that you raised this in the, uh,
terms of reference, um, uh, for this, um, uh, inquiry.
Um, uh, we have a range of ownership models, uh,
for, for the port sector.
Um, uh,
but one thing that is consistent throughout, uh, this, the,
this, uh, port system is, uh, ownership
by regional councils or their equivalent.
Um, and, um, we don't have a, uh,
uniform view on whether that's a good or a bad thing,
but very happy for, have you having you debate, debate that.
Um, I do note that, um, some of those ports that,
um, have got some private sector ownership, um,
normally it's 33%, um, private sector ownership, uh,
are open to far more scrutiny, um,
from the analysts than the other ports.
And, and that, uh, you could argue is, uh,
is assisting the performance of those courts.
Um, this is a really interesting time for you to be doing,
uh, doing the study
because things have been sort of pretty consistent
for the last 10, 15 years.
Not major change to the sector,
but you have the feeling that there is major change gonna
gonna happen over the next five to 10 years.
Um, if we are able to get the Taronga consent, uh, through,
you're gonna see, uh,
after the construction there a, um, very automated, um,
port operation, which will have an immediate, um, impact on,
um, on productivity.
Um, the Littleton project
likewise is gonna involve an element of, um, of automation
that likewise would help lift, uh, productivity.
And I think the North Port project, um, will be, uh,
seeing some automation as well.
And that will help productivity there.
Other ports are gonna have to respond
'cause it is a competitive model,
which is a very good thing.
Um, internationally, uh, we are, um, subject
to, um, um, uh, a range of, of, um,
uh, regulation.
Um, most interestingly, um, there is work being done on
a, um, a potential, um, uh,
climate change, um, related, um, uh,
charge, uh, on, on some fuels.
And in response to that, there is enormous, um, work being,
uh, put into, um, new fuel sources
for the international shipping fleet.
Um, some of, um,
the ports are very interested in this
and that they see New Zealand as a potential producer
of some of these, um, alternative fuels.
Um, but certainly we, we, we are not going to be able
to sit here and ignore what is um, uh,
agreed internationally and we'll have to respond.
Um, we're also seeing a trend towards, um, bigger ships.
I imagine that will, will continue.
But, uh, like everything, um, we are being disrupted
by the trade policy of the United States.
And also, uh, some of the environmental policies, uh,
being pursued by the United States.
Uh, the International Maritime Organization was very close
to achieving a, uh, agreed policy.
Uh, United States walked out of the room, uh,
and, um, uh, latest I've seen the United States
as threatening those who might, um,
actually implement the likely policy
with some form of retaliation.
So again, we are going to have to, um, um,
take note of, of, of what is happening there.
I think the final point, um, uh, to make is that, um,
uh, the reason perhaps why we weren't
focusing enough on ports was that up until, uh,
COVID striking the port sector was, was just doing its job,
doing the job, uh, very effectively.
Um, and then we had a major disruption,
and we haven't recovered from that.
I don't think you can say that it's COVID
that is causing the current disruptions.
But we have, um, had drought
and Panama Canal, we've had, um, uh, we have the Houthis,
um, uh, attacking shipping in the Red, red Sea.
Um, and, um, we've had, uh, huge surges
of trade, uh, as people are trying to get their product, um,
uh, into the United States ahead of, um,
proposed tariff increases.
And then we've had diversion of trade, um,
because of, uh, tariff policy in the United States, all
of which, um, is impacting on the reliability
of shipping to New Zealand.
We still haven't got reliability, um, um, and,
and ships sticking to window
and the way we had, uh, prior to COVID.
And this is one of the factors at play when we talk about
the productivity challenge.
So why don't I leave that things there.
Very happy to take your questions.
Um, and thank you again for the work you're doing.
I'm not sure I'm aware of a select committee that has done
so much groundwork, uh, and, and study of our sector.
So thank you very much. Thank
You. Thank you. It's
really appreciate that.
Um, look, I've got Dan start off with then,
and then I've, I'll kick in and then Julian and camp.
Thanks Charles. Great submission. Thanks, Mr. Chair.
Um, just wanna dive deeper
'cause I think you've, you've touched on all the key things.
I think this is your opportunity to tell us what you think
the changes need to be in order to get more productivity
and efficiency and effectiveness from the sector.
So you talked about the fact that you're pleased
that we've got regulation, governance,
and ownership reports on the table.
My question to you is, what do you think we need to be
looking at, uh, and recommending to the sector
or to government, um, to improve the productivity
or the organization of the sector?
One of the challenges of the role I perform
as the independent chair is trying to reflect a diverse, um,
range of, of, of views.
And I can't say there's an absolute consensus for them,
the in in the group,
but I think if, um, uh, speaking hypothetically, I would be,
um, asking questions about whether this is the best
ownership model for, for the port sector.
Um, ask what would change if perhaps there was, um,
a required, um, sell down of, of say 33% to,
um, the equity market, for example.
Um, and, um, what this would mean in terms of, um,
port operation, but also, um, what it would mean in terms
of possible consolidation within the sector.
So you, you'd recommend that, um, you'd recommend
that in terms of, uh, ownership
that we look at more private capital
or ownership of Lina?
Yeah, well our, our local
is our regional councils the best owner
would be my question.
Um, have you got any examples of regional councils
as shareholders contributing new funds
for major infrastructure, uh,
investment at ports? I ask the question.
Yeah. Has anybody got any subs on
that particular issue of ownership?
Yeah, I do. Brilliant.
Um, 'cause one thing that is interesting
to me about this is, is two things.
Well, there's two, sorry. There's two things, not one thing.
Um, for, um, supply chain
and freight transport efficiency for the country, country
as a whole, it's not just the individual decisions
that affect the productivity of an in of one port.
There's a bunch of ways in which
it influences landside infrastructure that would be
provided by central and local government.
Or if we were to be able to support more coastal shipping,
uh, and the hub and spoke spoke model,
we could avoid a whole bunch of costs potentially
if we had more frequency
and efficient options there, like a avoid road costs
and road transport costs.
So, um, I'm wondering how, like, in that sense,
how does, how do we, how would private ownership
help New Zealand to make those strategic decisions about
investment and about which ports grow
and get more investment, um, versus, you know,
whereas if it's privately owned
and they're just all focusing on their own operations
and not considering the NZ ink perspective.
But then my other question is, obviously this has happened
with regional or well unitary authority, um, ownership,
but in Auckland, um, you know, prices are going up
and that's affecting cargo owners and,
and, um, transport costs.
But why wouldn't private owners also seek
to maximize their return from that as well?
Um, well that, that's, you, you sort
of answered the question.
Um, I think it's a neutral answer, um, that the,
the ports right now are required,
even though they might be owned a hundred percent by a
unitary council or regional council
or a couple of regional councils, um, are required
to operate like private companies and, and, and,
and maximize, uh, the return.
So, so, so that, that,
that would be the situation regardless
of whether there was private money or, or,
or whether we stuck with the status quo.
Um, but I think the point you're making is that this is,
that this is a, um, a system
Yeah. That, that,
that, um, uh, operates.
Um, so a ship will call probably,
well, when we're talking about containers, okay,
a container ship will probably call it multiple
ports around New Zealand.
And if one port is slow, that will have a systemic,
um, impact.
If there's some weather re
disruption, there will be an impact.
The, the system will only work
well if everyone is efficient.
And that should be our goal.
But your point is, well,
I guess it is a hundred percent correct that this is a
system and what solving the problem
for one port is not gonna solve the problem for New Zealand.
Well, I guess how do we, I'm to talk about,
I'll let Julia, I'm happy to talk about hub
and spoke maybe as a separate company.
We'll talk that as a separate topic. Okay. Can
Just real quick. So
you, sorry, um, a question, uh, Julian,
Jen has just asked about, um, efficiency
and thinking about New Zealand Inc as a whole.
Uh, you've talked about the efficiency for, you know, the,
the, the matter, the ownership model, it might be the same,
but the question is, have you seen, uh, unitary
or regional council owned ports take a mindset
that is more New Zealand Inc than private ports,
private owned ports, private equity?
I think there is, um, over time there's been evidence
of parochialism in some decision making. No.
And, and ownership structure hasn't
provided that you've been able to observe.
Yeah, I think, I think though, um, you'd have to say
that some of the larger ports have to by definition
because they're, they are feed taking the,
the freight from a wider, um, hinterland.
Um, and it might be all
of New Zealand in some cases are having
to think systemically, maybe some other ports less,
It's not the ownership the size is what,
Yeah. So, on
on ownership to wrap that one there, two things.
The first one of 'em is, are you seeing any evidence
that there is a, um, a shortage of capital which relates
to the, uh, the ownership model? I mean, I can can imagine
Hundred percent Littleton, Littleton might be an
Issue a hundred percent on Littleton. Yeah. Yep.
Yeah. Littleton will be the obvious one, I would think.
Yeah. Um, the rest no evidence, no.
So just wondering whether in the sense of an ownership,
if there were a requirement to sell down
or to, um, to issue new equity that that, that,
that is in the context of the need
to invest in the port itself.
So an example might again,
be North port's got a pretty significant, um,
investment proposition. Is that what you're talking about?
Well, I think North port's a slightly different case
because don't forget it's 50% owned by, by, uh, to Yes.
Yeah. And, uh, so they, they, but there is a
Regional council Element there as
well. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So my question really is if there is a need
to invest in the ports, is that being held up
by the ownership, leaving aside Littleton?
And is the, is the, the, if you said
that was the requirement to, if the, if, if for example,
the proposal hypothetically just to say, well, you need
to sell down, it's in the context of needing to sell down
to invest in something in the port as opposed
to simply sell down some shares for freeing up capital
for regional councils, which goodness only knows
what they do with, uh,
The, the ports could, um, look at a range
of funding vehicles for, for capital expansion.
Okay. And the other area in terms of ports, some
of the ports appointed at other ports
and said that becau you, you raised that issue
of transparency, that, um,
they're not being particularly transparent
with their operation and
therefore some parts their operation effectively are
subsidized some of their others in
what should be a competitive space,
which maybe they shouldn't be doing what they're doing.
You got any observations on that?
Well, without doubt, if you are, um, uh, listed,
you are having to, um, meet a higher standard
of transparency than if you are not.
And, and, um, I commend to you,
if you haven't already looked at it, the most recent, um,
uh, result, uh,
and the associated documents from port toga, it's all there.
Yeah. Okay. The, the 50% on ation. Yeah.
But more than 50%. Yeah.
But it is, um, yeah, I, I, I should,
should have also stressed in my introductory comments that,
um, we tend to talk about container trade.
Yep. Yes. That's 50% of the equation. Yeah.
Um, and bulk is hugely important for New Zealand.
So in terms of exports, the most obvious area is logs,
but they're very big, uh, animal feed, um, imports, very,
very big fertilizer imports.
Um, we've also got, um, uh, a lot of fuel coming Okay.
Into, into New Zealand. So, so, um,
when we're talking about productivity, um, um, in,
in this context, we should probably distinguish
between the two because, um, a lot of the, um, uh,
negative comment is coming about the container Yeah.
Trade, but, but in terms of the bulk trade, we are a very
productive board sector.
Okay. That's, that's useful. No,
and it's a different model too.
You, you basically, you're dealing
with a ship going point to point.
Yeah. And not, not subject to the same delays you get
around the coast, that container ship.
That's good. Sorry. No, that's good to have, Tanya.
You wanna get, take some different,
I think. Yes, I do
think you, Mr. Chair. Thanks Charles.
Just on the infrastructure investment piece,
your submission sort of touches on enhancement
for dry dock facilities now.
Um, and it's just one sentence, which is fine,
but we hear a lot about, uh, Northport being,
you know, the, the option there.
Does the group have any, any views around
what enhancement would look like?
I mean, we might assume what that looks like,
but wanna hear from you directly?
Um, I think the, the group would definitely welcome, um,
um, a a couple of projects that perhaps could be,
uh, assisted by government.
Um, uh, having a, we actually do have a couple
of dry docks in New Zealand,
but they're not of sufficient size to, to, um, cope
with the ferries or, or larger ships.
Uh, so having a large dry dock in New Zealand would,
would certainly be something that would, would, would be,
um, uh, something that could potentially enhance, um, uh,
efficiency, productivity, uh, around, around the coast.
Um, but you'd have to make sure you got your,
your numbers right in terms of working,
whether you get a proper return on that,
that capital, uh, investment.
But, you know, when I was a, uh, a young person,
I remember going fishing in Wellington Harbor and,
and actually fishing off the dry dock that used to be there.
Uh, so we've had them in the past and,
and they were there for a reason.
Um, and, um, uh, uh, I personally would like to see, see,
see, um, uh, one somewhere.
Um, um, but there's also the possibility of some, um,
and we're working with Maritime New Zealand, um, and,
and the wider government system on this, um, a, a, um, uh,
a vessel, uh, or vessels able to help ships in distress
and make sure they, they don't wash onto
the rocks and things like that.
So, so, so having a, um, uh, a heavy toe, uh,
capacity in New Zealand would be something that,
that would be welcome as well.
Thanks. Did you wanna carry, you wanna carry on this?
I think, uh, d workforce and schools development. Okay.
Maybe come back to that just, just just on what, um,
Charles has just raised, because we have actually had the
conversation around, um, those, uh, safety, safety vessels,
heavy haulage ability.
Um, every port that I've talked to, mostly
of the ones in this part of the world sort of said, well,
yeah, we think it's really, really important,
but it's not our business
'cause we can't get a return on it somebody else's.
Can you just walk us through what we've, you know,
we've obviously had ferries getting, coming, coming
to grief occasionally, and, um, or losing power.
We had the, um, type, what was it, the, um,
container vessel freight
or whatever it was that, uh, was got itself into trouble.
What's your view of how that is best resolved? Well,
We've been very lucky, um, having, um, uh,
based at Port Taranaki a number of vessels with the,
uh, capability.
We're talking about, um, servicing the offshore
oil industry and gas industry.
So, um, we've been able to, um, essentially get,
get those vessels to, uh, to divert and
provided the assistance necessary.
Uh, in terms of, um, a couple of recent, uh, instances, uh,
and another, um, the Wellington, uh,
uh, tugs were able to get out there, um,
and do something they're probably not designed to do.
They're held it up. That's about all
The control, I think. Yeah, yeah,
exactly.
Um, so this is something we, we,
we should be thinking about.
And the problem is though, um, no individual
'cause ports had to be operating as companies and,
and, um, uh, not, not, uh, there
to provide public goods of this type.
Um, uh, it's very difficult to justify the case, uh, for a,
a tug that is, is large enough to provide the, uh,
the towing, um, uh, capability.
Um, um, um, you
that that'd be most, most ports will, will, will have, um,
um, a a desire to have, uh, such a service within
a reasonable range, but they're not really the people
that should be funding it.
So who are the people we,
I think a joint venture with government would be, or,
or, um, the wider, the wider industry.
And, and you know, as you are aware,
maritime New Zealand is funded through a levy,
maybe it's could be built into the levy levy, uh,
calculation and due course.
That's helpful. Right. I think
the next one I hope is Julianne. Um,
Yeah, actually I kind of somewhat related to
what I was asking earlier, but mostly focusing on paragraph
10 and 11 of your submission.
I was just, you know, there is that point that, um,
the whole transport system, road rail Yeah.
And coastal shipping and international shipping are all
a network and therefore, uh, the responsibility
to some extent of government where most of it is.
Um, you mentioned that ideally all road connections
to port should be through a state highway
that is grade separated from rail.
Um, like how would you see that funded, I guess who,
who should be paying for those sort of improvements?
Do you see that just as a New Zealand investment,
or are the users paying for that?
Uh, it would be, um, like funded by NZTA.
Right? So not, not the,
Uh, and funded using funded funded the way, you know,
with the same funding model at NZTA, um, gets funded, which
of course is changing, um, um, uh, right now.
Um, but it's, it, given
that we're talking about absolutely critical infrastructure
of national importance, um, it, it, it seems, um,
a little bit strange that the final few kilometers
often is the responsibility of a, of a local council
as opposed to, um, uh, NZTA, whereas,
whereas we're talking about a national network,
um, um, of freight.
Um, and so it's, it's, it's like the last kilometer
of a railroad line, not being kiwi rail responsible,
you know, it, it doesn't really make that much sense.
So, um, uh, if,
if those roads could be brought within the NZTA family,
I think it would allow us to think in the system a wide
sense in a way that we're not able to right now,
and we can ensure that there is appropriate investment where
that investment is needed.
Um, we've been talking a lot about road and rail,
and they do need to be as efficient
as possible if we're gonna have a fully, um, efficient,
um, port sector.
But we also need to be talking about coastal shipping.
I dunno if you have any questions on that
as a separate topic, but
Yeah, that I was gonna go there next.
In paragraph 11, you're talking about demand
for coastal shipping likely to grow.
And I see that as a, a huge opportunity really,
that isn't currently weighed up by NZTA
or in our, uh, transport planning to say, um,
is the best option here to, you know, upgrade one road
or is it to look at, um, you know,
supporting coastal shipping?
'cause maybe actually somewhat subsidizing the operation
of services to be frequent would have greater benefits than,
you know, in terms of reduced cost.
Um, and that's something that I just think we need someone
to kind of do the math on and figure it out,
but no one's currently in a position to do that.
And I guess one thing that we're, you know, well,
I'm not arguing for regional council ownership ports,
but I think if, if they were privately owned,
I'm interested in how, how we continue to take a New Zealand
Inc kind of perspective on investments
and infrastructure as opposed to investors just wanting
to maximize their return on,
on operations at a single place.
Well, um, I'll ask the last point first.
Um, if that was the sole motivation of private, um, uh,
investors, I'm not sure to, we be wanting
to do this expansion.
They, they, they've got, um, a range of customers there
who basically have to use that port.
Mm. Um, and uh, they could do very nicely just,
but by watching the demand increase and Right, right.
And registering prices, they're not doing that. Okay.
They're wanting to invest in an expansion
because, um, they know that we are as a country going
to have increased, um, demand for their services.
Um, government is talking about doubling the value
of exports by 2034. Uh, we're,
It's not necessarily we're Well on doubling the volume.
No, no, it's that it's not. Yeah.
But, but, but we know there is gonna be more productivity
and, and if we can get the economy growing more quickly, um,
we will be seeing a commensurate increase in
demand for imports.
Uh, so, so, um, uh,
I think all the ports are thinking about their role, um, um,
as a essential service provider for New Zealand, regardless
of their ownership model,
but those that are privately owned
and maybe are able to respond more quickly to, to, to some
of the, um, shifts in demand and finance things more easily.
But, but, um, uh, as we were saying
before, I don't think there's a finance
or lack of finance is, is, is is the problem,
except in perhaps in one, one case,
and I think there's no problem with finance there either.
It's just a question of how it's prioritized within a
region's, uh, list of essential projects.
Um, now, um, on coastal,
um, um, it has to grow
because we are, we are inevitably going to be moving to more
of a hub and spoke model
because the ships are gonna be larger
and they're not gonna be calling it as many ports, uh,
as they were in the past.
And so we will need to have more freight going from port
to port by sea, by road, and by rail.
Um, I think we'd leave it to the market to,
to determine that ideally we
can have a more level playing field.
'cause right now, um, uh, anyone wanting
to set up a domestic service that's New Zealand flagged is,
is facing much increased costs on an international
Can I just, can just ask a question, sorry.
In paragraph 11, sorry, I don't know.
Um, when you say the ETF, what does that stand for?
The emissions trading. Oh, okay. I mean E tfs Yeah.
Re answer. Ask that question. Sorry.
Actually, um, Julianne being, being the, um,
I wasn't trying to point, I just wasn't
No, no, no, no.
She spotted a typo. I thought it was a good,
I was like, what's the, what's the e Um,
but I did wanna know, like, I mean, do you think
that lowering labor standards
and stuff is really the, um, the right solution to the
leveling the playing field?
Or is there another way that, you know, we could
protect labor standards and, um,
Well, we, we could, we,
and we will, we are working globally to have,
have improved LA labor standards, um, in the, uh,
international shipping fleet.
Um, uh, but this is one of the issues
that you've probably talked to coastal providers, um,
already in this process.
No, we, we will Be though. Okay.
Well, this will be one of the things that they say that
that, that they have to pay New Zealand wage rates,
whereas an international competitor doesn't, um, they,
an international competitor doesn't need to pay, um, uh, GST
on a lot of inputs
and we're subject to the emissions trading scheme, um,
uh, for our fuels.
Um, whereas, um, internationally, um,
ships will often bunker offshore
and not, not pay that, that cost.
Now, that will equalize as the international rules kick in,
and we, we have, um, an international standard applied, uh,
and I'm expecting that most countries will be part of
that process, subject of course, to, um, navigating the, um,
the language outta Washington,
which is making everyone very nervous. Yes, of course. We,
Um, subs off this one,
'cause I've got at least three
areas that I think I'd like to go.
Um, the first one of those is just, um, it's interesting
that when I, I've asked this question about port's, roles
and profitability versus their, their role
and everyone of the owners that has said, our main,
the main function of our ports isn't to make money, it's
to do their job in the context
of New Zealand d can get any exports and imports in
and out, which is, I think it's great.
Um, can you just talk about it, um, the, um, you said if,
if profitability was the only driver tower on ordinary,
be looking to expand the port, you've also said,
and I know this is the case, that they've had to turn, um,
business away, they've had to turn a shipping
line away, they can't take it.
Yeah. Um, this, the issue which they've met, they've said
to me is that the whole system is very, very finely tuned.
In other words, if something goes wrong, road goes out,
it crane falls over, whatever it might,
whatever else it might be, the whole system, um,
gets impacted that productivity,
the reliability, et cetera gets impacted.
How do we deal with that?
That, you know, if you've got, if you're just at
that tipping point, very, very efficient
until something goes wrong, how do you fund essentially the
redundant, um, asset to make sure
that when something does go wrong,
you can actually cope with shipping?
You know what I mean? You've actually got some spares there.
It's like saying you, you, you four
to four tile in the car, that's great.
You don't want the one, don't wanna pay for the fifth one
until you get a puncture and then you really need it.
Yeah. Well, the system is actually quite resilient.
Um, um, and,
and we've demonstrated, um, with major earthquakes,
with major climatic events, um, um, an ability
to, uh, respond within days, um, uh, when,
when one port has has closed,
but that, that will have an impact around the coast and,
and will impact productivity.
But we, we can keep, keep operating.
We perhaps aren't as efficient as, uh, we would like to be.
But look, the, the, the, the, the main issue
for us right now is this on time arrival
by international shipping lines.
Um, and, um, prior to COVID,
the average was 80
to 85% on time arrival from the
international shipping lines.
Um, in 2024, things appeared
to be getting a little bit better.
We were up to 66%. Now it's back down to 55%.
Uh, so it's really, really difficult to try
and become more productive up against those figures.
Um, and, um, in, in terms of, um, uh, port
of Auckland, only 60%
of container vessels have turned up on time in,
in this financial year.
So, um, uh, we, we have forces
beyond our control there.
Um, having a major impact.
Um, we, I think are much better at controlling
what is happening around, uh, our coast subject.
Of course, the fact that there are storms
and other interventions we can't predict.
But, um, uh,
when we have the new Port of Tara project through,
and that's up and running
and automated when we have the new Littleton project
through, when we have the new Northport project through,
and when we, we have a couple of other minor projects
and then port projects through,
we will be in a far better position to,
to not only be more resilient, but be more efficient.
I think that you're not gonna see a step change until we get
that tar on project through.
And then that's throughout the, throughout the sector,
unfortunately, you'll be aware of the latest development.
Yes, I'm sure. So, so, uh, we're, we're, we're, we're,
we're not gonna get that consent even considered now till
the end of the year, maybe early next year, there's another,
you know, another six month delay.
You're probably looking to, you know,
once we get the consent minimum of two years
before we can get that constructed possibly longer.
So, uh, this is not something
that's gonna resolve overnight,
but I'm confident that over a, assuming these consents come
through and these projects are completed,
we are gonna be looking at a very different
equation in five years time.
Kim, did you have something on that specific area?
Basically said it's, it's, uh,
yeah, in that specific area?
Yeah, I think Charles, um, yeah, yeah.
The, the, the, the total, like the total of report
and the board and the owners, the CEO have given, like,
have contributed a lot beyond just trying to create profit
to making an efficient system for New Zealand,
the central up and North Island
and the economic hub that is that area.
Um, like how well do you think that,
I'm gonna call it Goodwill,
but you could call it like, you know,
civic duty can hold in the face of these constant delays.
At what point does Border total say, look, these upgrades,
uh, because also, you know,
key side is looking at selling down, um, shares
and you've, you've given a great account of the, you know,
the CEO's and um, uh,
CEO's views on helping New Zealand Inc.
And the chairs also talked about traffic around New Zealand,
and meeting CEOs have said that,
but how long can that hold if key side sell down
as shares if this important, you know, I think front door
to New Zealand's container shipping
or the, the door that leaves perhaps if that,
if this continues to be a problem.
Um, and if this doesn't get resolved
and things like the recent, uh, uh,
situation keep happening, how long will that
giving feeling from the continue, do you think?
Think,
Well, I'm sure that, that the most recent development has,
uh, has, um, uh,
seen people further pulling their hair out about, you know,
how much longer is it gonna take?
Uh, I'm assuming that there's absolute commitment to,
till the current process is, is resolved one way or another.
But, um, if, if the consents don't come through,
then we'll have to look at new models as New Zealand.
Um, yeah,
And if those models come, I mean, what,
how will we have an ability to actually, um, earth
the ships that are coming on the global supply chain market,
so the larger ships that are, that are being produced, um,
after the COVID Co of ships, shall we call it, um,
we're gonna have larger ships coming and,
and traveling the world seas.
How are we going to get them to New Zealand if we don't get
these projects through?
I'm not sure we're ever gonna get the very largest ships,
but we're gonna get larger ships, um, over time.
And, and again, toga plays a critical role
'cause it's got the deepest harbor, uh, in, in Australasia.
It's, it's, it's the one one port that's gonna be central
to, to this, uh, uh, to this, to this trend.
Um, and has to be on anyone's list of, of, of, of hub ports.
Um, um, when, when we actually get into that, uh, position.
But, um, just on on Hub and,
and spoke, there's no reason why we couldn't have a hub
and spoke model now,
but it's the international shipping lines that aren't,
aren't, um, imposing one.
Um, it's a very, you know, like ports, um, we are always,
ports are competing against each other.
The shipping lines are competing against each other.
And my observation has been that when one service ends,
someone comes in pretty fast
and replaces, um, replaces that service.
Um, so, um, we are not,
we're not seeing the international shipping lines,
even though they're saying they want the hub
and spoke bottle, actually.
Um, moving, moving to that.
And the other question I have is, um,
what are the hub ports going to be? No one can really,
Okay, well let, tell that to me.
Let's try and walk, walk our way through that
because yeah, you are the independent
chair of a group of ports.
You've probably got different views on that.
Yeah, exactly.
So they, they have the shipping lines have and,
and the key customers have.
So, so it's not an easy, you know, people could say, oh,
we need to move to hub and smoke tomorrow.
It's not an easy equation,
is the point I'm trying, trying to make.
I'm sure it will happen over time.
It's inevitable, it will happen.
Um, but it's gonna, you know,
how long it's gonna take, I don't know.
And, and, um, um,
one company's hub may be different from another we've seen
with, um, MSC, the world's biggest shipping company
very recently, a decision to make Wellington the hub
for their new service that has surprised a number
of people. Great for Wellington,
Can we then touch on hub
and spoke, um, area, if anybody else wants to get that?
Um, so I mean we've, we've visited one port, um, uh,
which has got a growth trajectory,
which was an interesting growth trajectory, a large chunk
of which is built on taking business from other ports in the
same part of the world, um, which was, was interesting, um,
you probably guess which port it is.
Um, but probably
A couple, But, sorry,
probably a couple, probably a couple like that.
Um, what role do we have in, in,
to pick up julianne's points,
particularly in investment in the land-based infrastructure,
the, um, and support
or not support of different, um, inland ports
because ultimately, I mean, there's only certain number
of places that everything can go, um,
and there's gonna be some private investment in them,
there's gonna be some public investment in them.
Do we get to the point of saying, look, this is
what we think, we see the model
of New Zealand Inc looking like, um,
for the next 1500 years, whatever it might be.
Um, you know, inland port, port, inland ports, you know,
hub port, spoke port.
Do we get to that point at some point?
Um, I, um,
and I think the group, um, are rather, um, would, would,
would council against government trying to, um,
dictate what the future should look like, like,
and, um, uh, would argue that we should leave that
to, to the market.
Okay. Can I, and, and I, can I, can I explain why?
Okay, so if you go back, um, a hundred years,
we had many more ports than we do.
The market has determined that we have ports
where we have them.
'cause that is meeting the, the demand, uh,
that is there for the ports.
Um, uh, I also point to, um, our law,
which, um, um, was in place until the late eighties, which
specified what port could do what.
And, um, four ports were allowed to take container traffic.
Um, Auckland, Wellington, Littleton,
and Port Charmers.
It was illegal for toga to take container trade.
Um, now that law has been changed
and anyone can take that trade.
What is our biggest container port? Hold on.
Uh, so, um, um, it, this, this a really good example
of government picking a winner and getting it wrong.
Can, well, perhaps maybe I wasn't being clear.
So we, we get a lot of advocacy
for investment in particular projects.
Government's quite good at building roads and railways.
Oh yeah. Things of that nature. Yeah.
So it's really more in that space of us go of, of,
of the gov ask the government if, if the government saying,
look, we, we will invest in that area,
we're not gonna invest in that area
because then they're competing with each
other or vice versa.
Uh, so there is a combined market
and, um, state component in this.
Yeah, I mean, if the market wants to build all the roads
and railways and everything like that,
fine, but it's not going to. But
We have to have, um, as efficient, uh, road rail
and coastal shipping, uh, uh, network as
as possible in terms of road
and rail, you obviously should be, um, uh, as
economists would tell you, looking, looking at the, um,
you know, cost benefit relationship of,
or a ratio for particular projects.
Um, and freight should be a big com part of that, that, that
that calculation
and we should be prioritizing investment, uh,
at those projects that are gonna have the biggest,
um, positive impact.
Um, for, for, for, um, a region and for New Zealand.
Um, obviously we need,
because it is the biggest export port, um, to have, um,
a really efficient, um,
and well invested system around toga, uh,
has to be a priority.
Uh, we have to, um, uh, have the same around Auckland
because it is the major import port as well
as being a very important export port as well.
Um, we're wanting to provide, um, more optionality
and, and, and look at where population growth is occurring.
So that's why we need to be investing more in, uh,
in North Port, uh, particularly the road and rail services
and the, and having a resilient road
and rail service to Northland.
Um, how many times in the last three years has the road
linked set highway linking, uh, Auckland with the north, uh,
being out of operation?
That's, it's incredible.
So, so we need to be, uh, prioritizing, uh, in that space.
Um, uh,
and then we should be look,
looking at the other major import and export ports
and taking appropriate decisions.
We, we, we don't necessarily need
to have exactly the same quality
and size of, of road and rail opportunity for every port.
That kind of was where I was going. Yeah. Yeah. Okay.
Cool. Right. Um, other questions people wanna ask?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Can I just, um,
ask about workforce and skills?
Yes. Yes. Um, you've identified that there is a, a challenge
around attracting personnel, um,
in particular parts of the country.
Yeah. So I've got two questions.
One is the geographical one, like where,
where are those particular parts
and what might be some of the things or reasons around that.
The second is whether you see any particular gaps across the
sector in terms of, not geographical,
but other particular parts.
I know you've, you've cited some of the work
that's already underway and they seem to be well occupied,
but interested in, in, um,
understanding that a little bit more.
Well, the situation around crane operators is, is so,
so that we actually have as a sector, uh, working
with others, um, uh, had
to invest in our own private training organization
and that that's, that's working well and, and, and,
and as part of the, the system.
But I think there are some, um, I do lose sleep at night,
for example, around the demographics of certain bits of the,
of the sector, particularly pilots.
Uh, I think it's improving.
Um, but, but,
but it is, um, it is quite an old older workforce, um,
and those skills are, are, uh, hard to recruit for.
Um, but in other parts of the country, um, some, some
of the, some of the roles are, um,
some parts of the country there are workforce issues
more, more generally.
Um, and, um, uh, you can earn the same money, um,
as you would working on a port,
if you are working on a pack house for example.
And, um, at certain times of the year it's very, very hard
to attract, uh, new labor.
Uh, so, so, um, we are not unique in terms
of our position around the economy.
I will comment that, um,
the port sector is generally very well paid.
It's, it's a, it's a good, good, good,
good area, but it's hard work.
Um, it's 24 7, uh, in, in some some cases
and, uh, that doesn't appeal to everyone.
So, so it is, it is a challenge, um, to, to ensure we get,
um, workforce that, that is needed
but prepared to invest in in developing those skills.
Um, um,
I don't know if you were up when you were up in Taronga,
you looked at the, uh, new, um, simulator they've got
for the proposed new board.
We haven't, we haven't been collectively
to Tara board. Well,
Okay. Well, you should go
definitely as, as, as a committee.
Um, and in fact, I, I commend to you
and I know you'll be most welcome.
You should go to every board if you, if you haven't you,
you should, um,
you'll find it very interesting 'cause every, everyone is different.
Um, and, and, um,
it's actually worth talking about the regional, um, uh,
skills issues.
'cause it does, it is different region from
region in some ports.
There is, uh, um, uh, a workforce that that is, um,
that travels between ports.
So, um, Nelson Pickton for example, share,
share a lot of stevedores.
Um, others are fully responsible
for their own stevedore operation.
Um, the, um,
ports aren't often the biggest employer on ports,
often stevedore companies and others will be.
And in the case of a, a port like to,
and we, we, we worked this all out when we were looking at
the work work, uh, health
and safety, um, legislation.
Um, there, there are literally, um, several thousand
PCPs working on that port.
And on any one day you're talking about four, 500, um, all
of whom are employing people.
So, so it's a very complicated equation.
But in terms of the core workforce, um, um, uh,
it is, is a challenge.
We, we are, it's much better now than during COVID.
That was very, very difficult.
Um, um,
but um, it's, it's something we will have to keep an eye on.
Thank. Any other questions on employment?
I'll just ask one note, just the automation side,
which mentioned earlier, um, ports have had a bit
of a mixed bag of a record in terms
of going down the automation track
and then certainly in Auckland's case gear.
Um, can you sort of see how that, how's
that can play out in your mind?
What are the benefits of automation?
What are the challenges? Automation?
Look, I'm not sure that the, uh, taxpayer can fund this,
but it would be great if you could visit, um, some
of the major ports, uh,
around the world and the Middle East.
Some, some, some of the recently built, um, ports and,
and they're incredible operations.
They're enormous. We can, we can never match them.
Um, but just look at the automation that is at the core
of their, uh, their operations.
I thought that, um, what's
A good example would come through,
Well, Singapore's probably the easiest, but, but,
but you can have a look at some of the Australian operations
as well, but Singapore would be the, the easiest to get to.
And, and, and, and it's very impressive.
Um, uh, the, um, uh,
it's much easier to automate a greenfield's sort of new,
new newly built port than to try and retrofit
or fit automation into an existing operation.
And that's where Port Auckland I think, uh, was brave and,
and and, um, it didn't quite, uh, work out.
I think this is why is so keen on this new development
because you will be able to design the development
around automation and it's gonna be transformative.
Cool. Uh, any last questions from anybody?
Can I just ask one thing and that is just the potential
for ports to grow and the space to grow into.
Um, there've been, certainly some people have suggested
that Island has actually got some limitations in terms of,
because there's a lot of stuff happening around it.
A lot of it's industrial. I'm not sure what,
what opportunities got.
Northport clearly has Auckland doesn't.
So, you know, what, what are the opportunities for ports
to grow port related activity around them
as you see it in the country?
It's a very, very good question.
Um, and, um, uh, there's a whole lot
of res reverse sensitivity issues, um, impacting the sector
as well, which we're having to manage.
Um, you know, one, one of the, um,
Really very positive, um, uh, changes
to our law in recent times has been
the way ports are now treated in the same way as airports
and mine companies and,
and are able to, to con you know, destination to designate,
uh, certain areas, um, for future activity.
But that's, we are not gonna see that all
of are disappearing into a port.
Um, people shouldn't worry.
Um, I think inland ports are, um,
are hugely helpful to meeting the, um, the demand.
But you know, the, the reason why Northport can't really,
um, expand is not the actual length of the birth.
They've got consent to do what they need there,
but they need to have somewhere to put the containers
that come off the ships and,
and the consent, the consent that they were uh, uh, seeking
to provide that space was denied.
So, so, um, we need some space on ports, but,
but um, it makes a lot of sense to find some very cheap, uh,
land somewhere else and,
and created that in the port for storage.
Charles really appreciate it.
Um, I think we would like more time
and we might have another conversation at later stage
and certainly we are intending
to visit quite a number of reports.
Um, we'll, we'll see
how many we end actually end up with, but we really appreciate it.
Look forward to further conversation. Well,
Thank you very much and thanks Charles.
Um, we, we actually are getting back together again on
the 25th of November.
If you wanted to beam in as a committee,
that would be fantastic.
If you can get that invitation sent through to, um,
to Jonathan, that'd be fantastic. Will
Do. Thank you, John.